docs/compliance/EU_AI_ACT_COMPLIANCE.md, before:

# EU AI Act Compliance Documentation

## Overview

This document outlines the Policy as Code platform's compliance with the European Union's Artificial Intelligence Act (EU AI Act), effective from August 2, 2025. The platform implements comprehensive compliance measures across all use cases to ensure adherence to EU AI Act requirements.

## EU AI Act Risk Classifications

The Policy as Code platform includes AI systems across different risk categories:

### High-Risk AI Systems (Annex III)

#### 1. Healthcare Eligibility System
- **Classification**: Medical Device AI System
- **Risk Level**: High-Risk
- **Compliance Measures**:
  - Human oversight for critical medical decisions
  - Comprehensive risk management system
  - Transparency and explainability requirements
  - Data governance and quality management
  - Bias monitoring and mitigation

#### 2. Immigration Visa Processing System
- **Classification**: Law Enforcement AI System
- **Risk Level**: High-Risk
- **Compliance Measures**:
  - Strict human oversight requirements
  - Prohibition of discriminatory practices
  - Individual risk assessment (no nationality-based decisions)
  - Comprehensive transparency measures
  - Bias detection and mitigation

#### 3. Social Benefits Allocation System
- **Classification**: Social Services AI System
- **Risk Level**: High-Risk
- **Compliance Measures**:
  - Human oversight for critical welfare decisions
  - Bias detection and fairness measures
  - Non-discriminatory benefit allocation
  - Transparency and explainability
  - Prohibition of social scoring

### Limited-Risk AI Systems

#### 4. Tax Calculation System
- **Classification**: Tax Calculation AI System
- **Risk Level**: Limited-Risk
- **Compliance Measures**:
  - Transparency and explainability
  - Clear calculation methodology
  - Data quality and accuracy measures
  - Audit trail maintenance

#### 5. Environmental Compliance System
- **Classification**: Environmental Assessment AI System
- **Risk Level**: Limited-Risk
- **Compliance Measures**:
  - Transparency and explainability
  - Clear assessment methodology
  - Environmental data validation
  - Regulatory compliance documentation

## Prohibited Practices Avoided

The platform explicitly avoids all prohibited practices under EU AI Act Article 5:

### ❌ Prohibited Practices NOT Implemented:
- **Social Scoring**: No systems create or maintain social scores
- **Exploitative Manipulation**: No systems exploit vulnerabilities
- **Biometric Categorization**: No systems categorize individuals by biometric data
- **Real-time Remote Identification**: No systems perform real-time identification
- **Predictive Policing**: No systems predict criminal behavior
- **Emotion Recognition**: No systems recognize emotions in workplace/education

### ✅ Compliant Practices Implemented:
- **Individual Assessment**: Decisions based on objective individual criteria
- **Transparency**: Clear decision reasoning and methodology
- **Human Oversight**: Critical decisions require human review
- **Bias Mitigation**: Active bias detection and mitigation
- **Fairness**: Equal treatment regardless of protected characteristics

## Compliance Requirements Implementation

### 1. Risk Management System (Article 9)

All high-risk AI systems implement comprehensive risk management:

```python
# Example from healthcare eligibility
ai_act_compliance = {
    "risk_level": "high_risk",
    "classification": "medical_device_ai_system",
    "requires_human_review": requires_human_review,
    "human_oversight_reasons": human_oversight_reasons,
    "risk_management": {
        "risk_assessment_completed": True,
        "mitigation_measures_applied": len(warnings) > 0,
        "monitoring_plan_active": True
    }
}
```

### 2. Data Governance (Article 10)

All systems implement data quality and governance measures:

```python
"data_governance": {
    "data_quality_assessed": True,
    "bias_monitoring_enabled": True,
    "accuracy_metrics_tracked": True
}
```

### 3. Technical Documentation (Article 11)

Comprehensive technical documentation maintained for all systems:
- System architecture and design
- Training data and methodologies
- Performance metrics and limitations
- Risk assessment and mitigation measures

### 4. Record Keeping (Article 12)

Immutable trace ledger maintains comprehensive records:
- Decision execution logs
- Input/output data
- Human oversight actions
- Audit trails and compliance documentation

### 5. Transparency and Information (Article 13)

All systems provide clear information to users:
- System capabilities and limitations
- Decision reasoning and methodology
- Human oversight requirements
- Appeal and redress mechanisms

### 6. Human Oversight (Article 14)

Critical decisions require human oversight:
- Medical procedure denials
- Visa application denials
- High-value benefit decisions
- Complex cases with multiple factors

### 7. Accuracy, Robustness, and Cybersecurity (Article 15)

Systems implement comprehensive accuracy and security measures:
- Input validation and sanitization
- Output verification and testing
- Cybersecurity protections
- Robustness testing and monitoring

## Bias Detection and Mitigation

### Protected Characteristics Monitoring

All systems monitor for bias based on protected characteristics:

```python
bias_assessment = {
    "nationality_bias_detected": False,  # Removed nationality-based decisions
    "gender_bias_detected": False,
    "age_bias_detected": False,
    "religion_bias_detected": False,
    "disability_bias_detected": False,
    "bias_mitigation_applied": True,
    "fairness_metrics_tracked": True
}
```

### Individual Assessment Approach

Systems use individual assessment rather than group-based decisions:

```python
# Immigration system example - individual risk assessment
individual_risk_factors = []
if criminal_record:
    individual_risk_factors.append("criminal_history")
if security_concerns:
    individual_risk_factors.append("security_concerns")
# No nationality-based risk assessment
```

## Transparency Measures

### Decision Explainability

All systems provide comprehensive decision explanations:

```python
"transparency_measures": [
    "Decision reasoning provided",
    "Eligibility criteria clearly stated",
    "Appeal process available",
    "Data sources disclosed"
]
```

### Methodology Disclosure

Clear disclosure of decision-making methodology:
- Calculation formulas and algorithms
- Risk assessment criteria
- Eligibility requirements
- Appeal and redress procedures

## Human Oversight Implementation

### Critical Decision Triggers

Human oversight required for:
- All denied applications (immigration, benefits)
- Critical medical procedure decisions
- High-value benefit allocations
- Complex cases with multiple factors
- Security watchlist cases

### Oversight Process

```python
# Example oversight implementation
if application_status == ApplicationStatus.DENIED:
    requires_human_review = True
    human_oversight_reasons.append("All visa denials require human review per EU AI Act")
```

## Legal References

All systems include comprehensive legal references:

```python
"legal_references": [
    "https://finlex.fi/fi/laki/alkup/2010/20100580#L1",  # Patient Safety Act
    "https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679",  # GDPR
    "https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32021L0426",  # EU AI Act
]
```

## Compliance Monitoring

### Continuous Monitoring

- Bias detection and mitigation monitoring
- Accuracy and performance tracking
- Human oversight effectiveness assessment
- Compliance audit trail maintenance

### Regular Assessments

- Quarterly compliance reviews
- Annual risk assessments
- Continuous bias monitoring
- Performance metric tracking

## Implementation Status

### ✅ Completed Compliance Measures:
- Risk classification and documentation
- Human oversight implementation
- Bias detection and mitigation
- Transparency and explainability
- Prohibited practices avoidance
- Legal reference integration

### 🔄 Ongoing Compliance Activities:
- Continuous monitoring and assessment
- Performance metric tracking
- Bias detection refinement
- Documentation updates

## Conclusion

The Policy as Code platform implements comprehensive EU AI Act compliance across all use cases, ensuring:

1. **High-Risk Systems**: Full compliance with Annex III requirements
2. **Limited-Risk Systems**: Appropriate transparency and documentation
3. **Prohibited Practices**: Complete avoidance of banned AI practices
4. **Human Oversight**: Critical decisions require human review
5. **Bias Mitigation**: Active detection and prevention of discriminatory practices
6. **Transparency**: Clear decision reasoning and methodology disclosure

The platform serves as a model for EU AI Act compliance in government decision-making systems, demonstrating how AI can be used responsibly and ethically while maintaining full legal compliance.

Commit message:

V 1.1
Add comprehensive contributing guidelines, data models assessment, and development roadmap updates. Introduce domain-first autonomous data architecture and enhance documentation for compliance and governance features.

docs/compliance/EU_AI_ACT_COMPLIANCE.md, after:

# EU AI Act Compliance Documentation

## Overview

This document outlines the Policy as Code platform's compliance with the European Union's Artificial Intelligence Act (EU AI Act), effective from August 2, 2025. The platform implements comprehensive compliance measures across all use cases to ensure adherence to EU AI Act requirements.

> **⚠️ Status**: This is a production-grade foundation with comprehensive compliance framework implementation. Requires production hardening for deployment.

## EU AI Act Risk Classifications

The Policy as Code platform includes AI systems across different risk categories:

### High-Risk AI Systems (Annex III)

#### 1. Healthcare Eligibility System
- **Classification**: Medical Device AI System
- **Risk Level**: High-Risk
- **Compliance Measures**:
  - Human oversight for critical medical decisions
  - Comprehensive risk management system
  - Transparency and explainability requirements
  - Data governance and quality management
  - Bias monitoring and mitigation

#### 2. Immigration Visa Processing System
- **Classification**: Law Enforcement AI System
- **Risk Level**: High-Risk
- **Compliance Measures**:
  - Strict human oversight requirements
  - Prohibition of discriminatory practices
  - Individual risk assessment (no nationality-based decisions)
  - Comprehensive transparency measures
  - Bias detection and mitigation

#### 3. Social Benefits Allocation System
- **Classification**: Social Services AI System
- **Risk Level**: High-Risk
- **Compliance Measures**:
  - Human oversight for critical welfare decisions
  - Bias detection and fairness measures
  - Non-discriminatory benefit allocation
  - Transparency and explainability
  - Prohibition of social scoring

### Limited-Risk AI Systems

#### 4. Tax Calculation System
- **Classification**: Tax Calculation AI System
- **Risk Level**: Limited-Risk
- **Compliance Measures**:
  - Transparency and explainability
  - Clear calculation methodology
  - Data quality and accuracy measures
  - Audit trail maintenance

#### 5. Environmental Compliance System
- **Classification**: Environmental Assessment AI System
- **Risk Level**: Limited-Risk
- **Compliance Measures**:
  - Transparency and explainability
  - Clear assessment methodology
  - Environmental data validation
  - Regulatory compliance documentation

## Prohibited Practices Avoided

The platform explicitly avoids all prohibited practices under EU AI Act Article 5:

### ❌ Prohibited Practices NOT Implemented:
- **Social Scoring**: No systems create or maintain social scores
- **Exploitative Manipulation**: No systems exploit vulnerabilities
- **Biometric Categorization**: No systems categorize individuals by biometric data
- **Real-time Remote Identification**: No systems perform real-time identification
- **Predictive Policing**: No systems predict criminal behavior
- **Emotion Recognition**: No systems recognize emotions in workplace/education

### ✅ Compliant Practices Implemented:
- **Individual Assessment**: Decisions based on objective individual criteria
- **Transparency**: Clear decision reasoning and methodology
- **Human Oversight**: Critical decisions require human review
- **Bias Mitigation**: Active bias detection and mitigation
- **Fairness**: Equal treatment regardless of protected characteristics

## Compliance Requirements Implementation

### 1. Risk Management System (Article 9)

All high-risk AI systems implement comprehensive risk management:

```python
# Example from healthcare eligibility
ai_act_compliance = {
    "risk_level": "high_risk",
    "classification": "medical_device_ai_system",
    "requires_human_review": requires_human_review,
    "human_oversight_reasons": human_oversight_reasons,
    "risk_management": {
        "risk_assessment_completed": True,
        "mitigation_measures_applied": len(warnings) > 0,
        "monitoring_plan_active": True
    }
}
```

### 2. Data Governance (Article 10)

All systems implement data quality and governance measures:

```python
"data_governance": {
    "data_quality_assessed": True,
    "bias_monitoring_enabled": True,
    "accuracy_metrics_tracked": True
}
```

### 3. Technical Documentation (Article 11)

Comprehensive technical documentation maintained for all systems:
- System architecture and design
- Training data and methodologies
- Performance metrics and limitations
- Risk assessment and mitigation measures

### 4. Record Keeping (Article 12)

Immutable trace ledger maintains comprehensive records:
- Decision execution logs
- Input/output data
- Human oversight actions
- Audit trails and compliance documentation

### 5. Transparency and Information (Article 13)

All systems provide clear information to users:
- System capabilities and limitations
- Decision reasoning and methodology
- Human oversight requirements
- Appeal and redress mechanisms

### 6. Human Oversight (Article 14)

Critical decisions require human oversight:
- Medical procedure denials
- Visa application denials
- High-value benefit decisions
- Complex cases with multiple factors

### 7. Accuracy, Robustness, and Cybersecurity (Article 15)

Systems implement comprehensive accuracy and security measures:
- Input validation and sanitization
- Output verification and testing
- Cybersecurity protections
- Robustness testing and monitoring

## Bias Detection and Mitigation

### Protected Characteristics Monitoring

All systems monitor for bias based on protected characteristics:

```python
bias_assessment = {
    "nationality_bias_detected": False,  # Removed nationality-based decisions
    "gender_bias_detected": False,
    "age_bias_detected": False,
    "religion_bias_detected": False,
    "disability_bias_detected": False,
    "bias_mitigation_applied": True,
    "fairness_metrics_tracked": True
}
```

### Individual Assessment Approach

Systems use individual assessment rather than group-based decisions:

```python
# Immigration system example - individual risk assessment
individual_risk_factors = []
if criminal_record:
    individual_risk_factors.append("criminal_history")
if security_concerns:
    individual_risk_factors.append("security_concerns")
# No nationality-based risk assessment
```

## Transparency Measures

### Decision Explainability

All systems provide comprehensive decision explanations:

```python
"transparency_measures": [
    "Decision reasoning provided",
    "Eligibility criteria clearly stated",
    "Appeal process available",
    "Data sources disclosed"
]
```

### Methodology Disclosure

Clear disclosure of decision-making methodology:
- Calculation formulas and algorithms
- Risk assessment criteria
- Eligibility requirements
- Appeal and redress procedures

## Human Oversight Implementation

### Critical Decision Triggers

Human oversight required for:
- All denied applications (immigration, benefits)
- Critical medical procedure decisions
- High-value benefit allocations
- Complex cases with multiple factors
- Security watchlist cases

### Oversight Process

```python
# Example oversight implementation
if application_status == ApplicationStatus.DENIED:
    requires_human_review = True
    human_oversight_reasons.append("All visa denials require human review per EU AI Act")
```

## Legal References

All systems include comprehensive legal references:

```python
"legal_references": [
    "https://finlex.fi/fi/laki/alkup/2010/20100580#L1",  # Patient Safety Act
    "https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32016R0679",  # GDPR
    "https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32021L0426",  # EU AI Act
]
```

## Compliance Monitoring

### Continuous Monitoring

- Bias detection and mitigation monitoring
- Accuracy and performance tracking
- Human oversight effectiveness assessment
- Compliance audit trail maintenance

### Regular Assessments

- Quarterly compliance reviews
- Annual risk assessments
- Continuous bias monitoring
- Performance metric tracking

## Implementation Status

### ✅ Completed Compliance Measures:
- Risk classification and documentation
- Human oversight implementation
- Bias detection and mitigation
- Transparency and explainability
- Prohibited practices avoidance
- Legal reference integration

### 🔄 Ongoing Compliance Activities:
- Continuous monitoring and assessment
- Performance metric tracking
- Bias detection refinement
- Documentation updates

## Conclusion

The Policy as Code platform implements comprehensive EU AI Act compliance across all use cases, ensuring:

1. **High-Risk Systems**: Full compliance with Annex III requirements
2. **Limited-Risk Systems**: Appropriate transparency and documentation
3. **Prohibited Practices**: Complete avoidance of banned AI practices
4. **Human Oversight**: Critical decisions require human review
5. **Bias Mitigation**: Active detection and prevention of discriminatory practices
6. **Transparency**: Clear decision reasoning and methodology disclosure

The platform serves as a model for EU AI Act compliance in government decision-making systems, demonstrating how AI can be used responsibly and ethically while maintaining full legal compliance.
